HOW CAN WE CARE FOR, SUPPORT, AND PROMOTE PROPER NUTRITION DURING BABY'S FIRST 1,000 DAYS?
LET US GIVE OUR CHILDREN A GOOD START FOR A HEALTHY AND BRIGHT FUTURE. 
LET US PROVIDE THEM WITH PROPER AND ADEQUATE NUTRITION DURING THEIR FIRST ONE THOUSAND DAYS OF LIFE.
PREGNANCY (270 Days)
Promote and support proper nutrition for mothers before, during, and while breastfeeding.
Ensure that the mother has a healthy weight before and during pregnancy.
Eat nutritious foods.
Visit the health center at least four (4) times during pregnancy.
Take iron-folic acid supplements every day to help prevent anemia.
Use iodized salt.
Learn the proper way of breastfeeding.
Give birth in a birthing facility with a trained health worker.
BABY'S 0 TO 6 MONTHS (180 Days)
Promote, support, and ensure that babies receive only breast milk during their first six (6) months of life.
At new birth, practice First Hug. Make the baby immediately  hug its mother for the baby to avoid being cold and to strengthen its body.
Start breastfeeding within the first hour after birth.
Have your baby undergo newborn screening.
Feed your baby only breast milk during the first six (6) months so that your baby will grow up healthy, tall, and intelligent.
Do not give your baby formula milk, water, or any other food or drink.
The mother should visit the health center with her baby for a postnatal check-up.
Have your baby weighed and measured for length every month to monitor his or her growth.
BABY'S 6 MONTHS TO 2 YEARS (550 Days)
From six (6) months, give the baby  other appropriate foods while continuing breastfeeding until two (2) years of age or beyond.
Provide appropriate foods starting at six (6) months while continuing breastfeeding.

Feed your baby foods from four (4) or more food groups out of the seven food groups, including rice, corn, and potatoes; fruits and vegetables rich in Vitamin A, meat, fish, poultry, and eggs; and legumes such as string beans, hyacinth beans, and lima beans.
Feed your baby family foods 2–3 times a day when he or she is 6–8 months old; and 3–4 times a day when he or she is 9 months to 2 years old, with an additional 1–2 nutritious snacks such as fruits and bread.
Bring your baby to the health center for regular check-ups, especially when sick, and also for free Vitamin A supplementation and immunization.
Always talk and play with your baby. Your baby will grow up strong and healthy with enough attention, care, and affection from the family.