SAVE YOUR BABY from Mental Retardation

Basic Information About Newborn Screening

What is newborn screening? 
Newborn Screening (NBS) is a simple procedure  to find out if your baby has a congenital metabolic disorder that may lead to mental retardation or even death if left untreated.

Why is newborn screening important? 
Most babies with metabolic disorders look "normal" at birth. By doing NBS, metabolic disorders may be detected even before clinical signs and symptoms are present. And as a result of this, treatment can be given early to prevent consequences of untreated conditions. 

When is newborn screening done? 
NBS is ideally done immediately after 24 hours from birth.

How is newborn screening done? 
A few drops of blood are taken from the baby's heel, blotted on a special absorbent filter card and then sent to Newborn Screening Center (NSC). 

Who will collect the sample for newborn screening?
The blood sample for NBS may be collected by any of the following: physician, nurse, medical technologist or trained midwife. 

Where is newborn screening available?
NBS is available in Hospitals, Lying-ins, Rural Health Unit, Health Centers and some private clinics. 

How can results be claimed? 
Results can be claimed from the health facility where NBS was availed. Normal NBS Results are available by 7-14 working days from the time samples are received at the NSC. 
Positive NBS results are relayed to the parents immediately by the health facility. Please ensure  that the address and phone number you will provide to the health facility are correct. 

What is the meaning of the newborn screening 
A NEGATIVE SCREEN MEANS THAT THE NBS RESULT IS NORMAL. 
A positive screen means that the newborn must be brought back to his/her health practitioner for further testing. 

Why do some babies need to be retested?
Here are some possible reasons for retesting: 
The sample was taken less than 24 hours from birth. 
There is a problem with the blood sample. 
The first test showed a possible health problem. 


Your attending health practitioner will contact you if your baby needs a retest. 

If your baby needs to be retested, get it done right away. 

What must be done when a baby has a positive Newborn Screening result? 
Babies with positive results must be referred at once to a specialist for confirmatory testing and further management. 

What happens to the dried blood samples after screening? 
After the dried blood spot has been tested, it will be stored in a secure locked area. The stored sample is retained to allow for normal quality control practices and may be used for ethics committee approved research for the benefit of the general public. 

Can a parent refuse the screening of his/her baby? 
A parent may refuse the newborn screening test on behalf of his/her baby and will be required to sign the hospital's Refusal Form. Refusal acknowledges understanding that not testing might unnecessarily risk the baby's health if one of the screened disorders is present. 


Help us save the 33,000 babies affected by any of these disorders.
Ask for Newborn Screening from your health worker. 

What are the disorders included in the Philippine newborn screening program? 
Currently, these are the disorders being screened: 
Congenital Hypothyroidism (CH) 
CH results from lack or absence of thyroid hormone which is essential for the physical and mental development of a child. If the disorder is not detected and hormone replacement is is not initiated within 2 weeks, the baby with CH may suffer from growth and mental retardation. 
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) 
CAH is an endocrine disorder that causes severe salt loss, dehydration and abnormally high levels of male sex hormones in both boys and girls. If not detected and treated early, babies with CAH may die within 7-14 days. 
Galactosemia (GAL) 
GAL is a condition in which babies are unable to process galactose, the sugar present in milk. Accumulation of excessive galactose in the body can cause many problems, including liver damage, brain damage and cataracts.
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
 PKU is a rare condition in which the baby cannot properly use one of the building blocks of protein called. phenylalanine. Excessive accumulation of phenylalanine in the blood causes brain damage. 
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency (G6PD def) 
G6PD deficiency is a condition where the body lacks the enzyme called G6PD. Babies with this deficiency may have hemolytic anemia resulting from exposure to oxidative substances found in drugs, foods and chemicals. 
Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD) 
MSUD is a genetic metabolic disorder resulting from the defective activity of the enzyme branched chain alpha-keto-acid dehydrogenase complex. Accumulation of the branched chain amino acids is toxic to the brain.

REMINDERS TO PARENTS 
G6PD deficiency is the most common condition among the NBS Panel of Disorders.

 Napthalene or moth ball, and some drugs Including herbal medicine should be avoided by people with G6PD deficiency. 

While waiting for the NBS result, parents are advised not to expose their baby to moth ball. More so, all medications that will be cations that will be given to the baby must be prescribed by a doctor. 

If the NBS result is G6PD deficient, consult the baby's doctor and proceed with the confirmatory test. Refer the result to your physician.