WHAT IS EPILEPSY

- is a disorder of the brain, it presents as a convulsion with powerful contractions of parts and bodies. A sudden brief change in thinking, attention, sensation or behavior

What are Seizure or Fits?
Martial motor seizures – brief twitching, jerking of one arm, leg or half of the face
Partial sensory seizures – brief unusual sensations or numbness on one arm, leg or half of face, temporary visual disturbances 
Partial complex seizures – brief and sudden changes in the behavior or mental state; appears to be in a trance, stares blankly, unresponsive when spoken to 
Absence seizures – frequent repeated spells of daydreaming or brief staring blinking spells in children
Drop attacks – sudden falls or collapse, head drops

What causes it?
Genetic factors
Head injury
Pre natal injury
Poisoning
Drugs and alcohol
Brain infections
Strokes
Brain tumors
Chemical imbalances in the body

What triggers Seizures/Fits?
Not enough sleep
Stress
Food allergies
Alcohol
Illicit drugs, such as cocaine
Flashing lights (as in strobe lights, video games)

Can Epilepsy be cured?
- Currently, there is no cure for epilepsy. Most seizures, though can be managed with a single medication. For others, more than one medication may be needed

Can Epilepsy be managed?
- majority of seizures can be managed (80-85%) as long as medications are taken regularly. Persons with seizures can go to a neurologist, pediatrician, internist & family physician who provide treatment for epilepsy. Those patients whose seizures are difficult to control should go to medical centers where Neurology/Seizure clinics are located

How to handle someone who is having a Seizure/Fits
Stay calm
Don’t try to restrain the person
Remove sharp objects from and around the person
Make sure that the person who is having seizures/fits is secured
Gently turn the person on his/her side so any fluid in the mouth can safely come out
Never try to force the person’s mouth open or put anything on it
Observe the seizure, so you’ll be able to describe what happens before, during and after the seizure
When the seizure is over, watch the person for signs and confusion. Allow the person to rest or sleep if he or she wants

Things to do to control Seizure/Fits
Take the prescribed medicines as directed
Get plenty of rest
Avoid alcohol
Quit smoking
Stay healthy
Learn relaxation/meditation